bpo-17005: Add a topological sort algorithm (#11583)
python/cpython: Doc/library/functools.rst

      Returning NotImplemented from the underlying comparison function for
      unrecognised types is now supported.

> .. function:: topsort(pairs)

Reviewer: The functions in the functools module are documented in (nearly) alphabetical order, so `topsort` needs to come between `singledispatch` and `update_wrapper`, not here.

> .. function:: topsort(pairiter)

Reviewer 2: The argument is called "pairlist" in the implementation.  I would use "pairs" in both cases.

   Topologically sort a list of (parent, child) pairs. Return a sequence of

>    the elements in dependency order (parent to child order).

Reviewer: This interface can't be used if your dependency graph has an isolated vertex (that is, a vertex with no edges), because there is no way to pass the isolated vertex to the function.

Author: Let's keep the discussion about the API in the issue. Although I agree with that, the limitation is on purpose. Different API's with different properties can be implemented and I am happy to discuss and implement the one that everyone agrees on.

Be aware that a lot of people can be confused if you process into a linear order isolated nodes, because that may not be what they expect (either because they do not know that there are isolated nodes or because they do not expect the function to behave like that). This is a choice that we have to make, so let's discuss in the issue.

>    If a dependency cycle is found it raises :exc:`CycleError`.

Reviewer: `CycleError` needs to be documented in the "Built-in Exceptions" chapter.

Reviewer 3: Correct me if I am wrong but I don't think this needs to go into "Built-in Exceptions" chapter since this is custom exception specific to this function and there are a lot of other places (`CookieError`, `NetrcParseError`, etc.) that are not present in the chapter.

   This function can be used directly with a graph given by 2-tuples

>    specifiying the relationships between elements::

Reviewer 4: Minor spelling nit, "specifying."

>       >>> topsort([(1,2), (3,4), (5,6), (1,3), (1,5), (1,6), (2,5)])

Reviewer 5: Why don't use ```(1, 2)``` (whitespace) here?

      [1, 2, 3, 5, 4, 6]
      >>> topsort([(1,2), (1,3), (2,4), (3,4), (5,6), (4,5)])
      [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]

>    If we provide a cyclic graph, :exc:`CycleError` will be raised:

Reviewer 6: Perhaps unsurprisingly, I prefer the API used by https://pypi.org/project/toposort/:
```
>>> list(toposort({2: {11},
...                9: {11, 8, 10},
...                10: {11, 3},
...                11: {7, 5},
...                8: {7, 3},
...               }))
[{3, 5, 7}, {8, 11}, {2, 10}, {9}]
```
That is, don't lose the information that 3, 5, and 7 can be used in any order and still satisfy the conditions. There's also a convenience function `toposort_flatten` that returns a single flattened list. Although I'm not wild about the way it sorts the elements in the sets.

Author: I think both API's do not overlap completely, as flattening this version will depend on the order of the elements in the set as you mention, while the result in the current one is always deterministic and I do not think you can reconstruct this API with the current one. Maybe we could expose both APIs. Thoughts?

Reviewer: Instead of taking a *dict* mapping vertices to *sets* of their out-neighbours, I suggest taking a *mapping* from vertices to *iterables* of their out-neighbours. Then someone who needs a deterministic result can use lists instead of sets for the iterables. (Or ordered sets, or whatever is appropriate for their problem.)

      >>> topsort([(1,2), (2,3), (3,2)])
      Traceback (most recent call last):
      CycleError: ([1], {2: 1, 3: 1}, {2: [3], 3: [2]})

   This function can be used to implement a simple version of the C3
   linearization algorithm used by Python to calculate the Method Resolution
   Order (MRO) of a derived class::

      from itertools import tee
      def c3_linearization(inheritance_seqs):
          graph = set()
          for seq in inheritance_seqs:
              a, b = tee(seq)
              next(b, None)
              graph.update([*zip(a,b)])
          return topsort(graph)

   As a test, we can compare with the MRO of a simple diamond inheritance::

>       >> class A: pass

Reviewer: The usual interactive prompt is `>>>` not `>>`.

      >> class B(A): pass
      >> class C(A): pass
      >> class D(B, C): pass

>       >>D.__mro__

Reviewer: There is normally a space after the interactive prompt and before the code.

           ts = TopologicalSorter(graph)
           ts.prepare()
           while ts.is_active():
               for node in ts.get_ready():
                   yield node
                   ts.done(node)

   This function can be used to implement a simple version of the C3
   linearization algorithm used by Python to calculate the Method Resolution
   Order (MRO) of a derived class::

       >>> class A: pass
       >>> class B(A): pass
       >>> class C(A): pass
       >>> class D(B, C): pass

       >>> D.__mro__
       (__main__.D, __main__.B, __main__.C, __main__.A, object)

       >>> topological_order = tuple(stable_topological_order(graph))
       >>> tuple(reversed(topological_order))
       (__main__.D, '__main__.B, __main__.C, __main__.A, object)

   The class is designed to easily support parallel processing of the nodes as they
   become ready. For example::

       topological_sorter = TopologicalSorter()

       # Add nodes to 'topological_sorter'...

       topological_sorter.prepare()
       while topological_sorter.is_active():
           for node in topological_sorter.get_ready():
               # Worker threads or processes take nodes to work on off the

>                # of 'task_queue' queue.

Reviewer 7: remove "of"

   every directed edge u -> v from vertex u to vertex v, vertex u comes before vertex
   v in the ordering. For instance, the vertices of the graph may represent tasks to
   be performed, and the edges may represent constraints that one task must be
   performed before another; in this example, a topological ordering is just a valid
   sequence for the tasks. A complete topological ordering is possible if and only if
   the graph has no directed cycles, that is, if it is a directed acyclic graph.

   If the optional *graph* argument is provided it must be a dictionary representing
   a direct acyclic graph where the keys are nodes and the values are iterables of
   all predecessors of that node in the graph (the nodes that have edges that point
   to the value in the key). Additional nodes can be added to the graph using the
   :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.add` method.

   In the general case, the steps required to perform the sorting of a given graph
   are as follows:

         * Create an instance of the :class:`TopologicalSorter` with an optional
            initial graph.
         * Add additional nodes to the graph.

>          * Call "prepare()" on the graph.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
         * Call :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.prepare` on the graph.
```

>          * Call "finalize()" on the graph.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
         * Call "prepare()" on the graph.
```

I'm not invested in the "prepare" name, but since it's called that instead of "finalize" everywhere else for now, just keeping it in synch.

         * While :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.is_active` is ``True``:
             * Iterate over the nodes returned by :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.get_ready`
               and process them. Call :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.done` on each node as
               it finishes processing.

   In case that just an inmediate sorting of the nodes in the graph is required and

>    no parallelism is involved, the convencience method :meth:`TopologicalSorter.stable_oder`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
   no parallelism is involved, the convenience method :meth:`TopologicalSorter.static_order`
```

>    no paralellism is involved, the convencience method :meth:`TopologicalSorter.stable_oder`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
   no paralellism is involved, the convenience method :meth:`TopologicalSorter.stable_oder`
```

>    no paralellism is involved, the convencience method :meth:`TopologicalSorter.stable_oder`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
   no parallelism is involved, the convencience method :meth:`TopologicalSorter.stable_oder`
```

>    can be used directly. For example, using this method is possible to implement a simple

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
   can be used directly. For example, this method can be used to implement a simple
```

   Resolution Order (MRO) of a derived class:

   .. doctest::
      :hide:

       >>> class A: pass
       >>> class B(A): pass
       >>> class C(A): pass
       >>> class D(B, C): pass

       >>> D.__mro__
       (<class 'D'>, <class 'B'>, <class 'C'>, <class 'A'>, <class 'object'>)

       >>> graph = {D: {B, C}, C: {A}, B: {A}, A:{object}}
       >>> ts = TopologicalSorter(graph)
       >>> topological_order = tuple(ts.static_order())
       >>> tuple(reversed(topological_order))
       (<class 'D'>, <class 'B'>, <class 'C'>, <class 'A'>, <class 'object'>)

   The class is designed to easily support parallel processing of the nodes as they
   become ready. For instance::

       topological_sorter = TopologicalSorter()

       # Add nodes to 'topological_sorter'...

       topological_sorter.prepare()
       while topological_sorter.is_active():
           for node in topological_sorter.get_ready():
               # Worker threads or processes take nodes to work on off the
               # 'task_queue' queue.
               task_queue.put(node)

           # When the work for a node is done, workers put the node in

>            # 'finalized_tasks_queue' so we can get more nodes to work on

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
           # 'finalized_tasks_queue' so we can get more nodes to work on.
           # The definition of 'is_active()' guarantees that, at this point, at
           # least one node has been placed on 'task_queue' that hasn't yet
           # been passed to 'done()', so this blocking 'get()' must (eventually)
           # succeed.  After calling 'done()', we loop back to call 'get_ready()'
           # again, so put newly freed nodes (if any) on 'task_queue' as soon
           # as logically possible.
```

           node = finalized_tasks_queue.get()

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

Not clear from here whether this works:  I'm trying to delete an unhelpful empty line.

      previously.

   .. method:: done(*nodes)

      Marks a set of nodes returned by :meth:`TopologicalSorter.get_ready` as
      processed, unblocking any successor of each node in *nodes* for being returned
      in the future by a call to :meth:`TopologicalSorter.get_ready`.

      Raises :exc:`ValueError` if any node in *nodes* has already been marked as
      processed by a previous call to this method or if a node was not added to the
      graph by using :meth:`TopologicalSorter.add`, if called without calling
      :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.prepare` or if node has not yet been returned by
      :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.get_ready`.

   .. method:: get_ready()

      Returns a ``tuple`` with all the nodes that are ready. Initially it returns all
      nodes with no predecessors and once those are marked as processed by calling
      :meth:`TopologicalSorter.done`, further calls will return all new nodes that
      have all their predecessors already processed until no more progress can be
      made.

      Raises :exc:`ValueError` if called without calling
      :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.prepare` previously.

   .. method:: static_order()

>       Returns an iterable of nodes in a stable topological order. Using this method

Reviewer 7: It's unclear what "stable" is intended to mean in this context.  Perhaps just remove the word?

   .. versionadded:: 3.8

.. class:: TopologicalSorter(graph=None)

   Provides functionality to topologically sort a graph of hashable nodes.

   A topological order is a linear ordering of the vertices in a graph such that for
   every directed edge u -> v from vertex u to vertex v, vertex u comes before vertex
   v in the ordering. For instance, the vertices of the graph may represent tasks to
   be performed, and the edges may represent constraints that one task must be
   performed before another; in this example, a topological ordering is just a valid
   sequence for the tasks. A complete topological ordering is possible if and only if
   the graph has no directed cycles, that is, if it is a directed acyclic graph.

   If the optional *graph* argument is provided it must be a dictionary representing

>    a direct acyclic graph where the keys are nodes and the values are iterables of

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
   a directed acyclic graph where the keys are nodes and the values are iterables of
```

   all predecessors of that node in the graph (the nodes that have edges that point
   to the value in the key). Additional nodes can be added to the graph using the
   :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.add` method.

   In the general case, the steps required to perform the sorting of a given graph
   are as follows:

         * Create an instance of the :class:`TopologicalSorter` with an optional initial graph.
         * Add additional nodes to the graph.
         * Call :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.prepare` on the graph.
         * While :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.is_active` is ``True``, iterate over the
           nodes returned by :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.get_ready` and process them.
           Call :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.done` on each node as it finishes processing.

>    In case that just an inmediate sorting of the nodes in the graph is required and

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
   In case just an immediate sorting of the nodes in the graph is required and
```

               # Worker threads or processes take nodes to work on off the
               # 'task_queue' queue.
               task_queue.put(node)

           # When the work for a node is done, workers put the node in
           # 'finalized_tasks_queue' so we can get more nodes to work on.
           # The definition of 'is_active()' guarantees that, at this point, at
           # least one node has been placed on 'task_queue' that hasn't yet
           # been passed to 'done()', so this blocking 'get()' must (eventually)
           # succeed.  After calling 'done()', we loop back to call 'get_ready()'
           # again, so put newly freed nodes on 'task_queue' as soon as
           # logically possible.
           node = finalized_tasks_queue.get()
           topological_sorter.done(node)

   .. method:: add(node, *predecessors)

      Add a new node and its predecessors to the graph. Both the *node* and
      all elements in *predecessors* must be hashable.

      If called multiple times with the same node argument, the set of dependencies
      will be the union of all dependencies passed in.

      It is possible to add a node with no dependencies (*predecessors* is not

>       provided) as well as provide a dependency twice. If a node that has not been

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
      provided) or to provide a dependency twice. If a node that has not been
```

      provided before is included among *predecessors* it will be automatically added
      to the graph with no predecessors of its own.

      Raises :exc:`ValueError` if called after :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.prepare`.

   .. method:: prepare()

      Mark the graph as finished and check for cycles in the graph. If any cycle is
      detected, :exc:`CycleError` will be raised, but
      :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.get_ready` can still be used to obtain as many nodes
      as possible until cycles block more progress. After a call to this function,

>       the graph cannot be modified and therefore no more nodes can be added using

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
      the graph cannot be modified, and therefore no more nodes can be added using
```

      by :meth:`TopologicalSorter.get_ready`.

      The :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.__bool__` method of this class defers to this
      function, so instead of::

          if ts.is_active():
              ...

      if possible to simply do::

          if ts:
              ...

      Raises :exc:`ValueError` if called without calling :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.prepare`
      previously.

   .. method:: done(*nodes)

      Marks a set of nodes returned by :meth:`TopologicalSorter.get_ready` as
      processed, unblocking any successor of each node in *nodes* for being returned
      in the future by a call to :meth:`TopologicalSorter.get_ready`.

      Raises :exc:`ValueError` if any node in *nodes* has already been marked as
      processed by a previous call to this method or if a node was not added to the
      graph by using :meth:`TopologicalSorter.add`, if called without calling
      :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.prepare` or if node has not yet been returned by
      :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.get_ready`.

   .. method:: get_ready()

      Returns a ``tuple`` with all the nodes that are ready. Initially it returns all

>       nodes with no predecessors and once those are marked as processed by calling

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
      nodes with no predecessors, and once those are marked as processed by calling
```

      :meth:`TopologicalSorter.done`, further calls will return all new nodes that

>       have all their predecessors already processed until no more progress can be

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
      have all their predecessors already processed. Once no more progress can be
      made, empty tuples are returned.
```
This feels clearer to me broken up into separate sentences.

           # been passed to 'done()', so this blocking 'get()' must (eventually)
           # succeed.  After calling 'done()', we loop back to call 'get_ready()'
           # again, so put newly freed nodes on 'task_queue' as soon as
           # logically possible.
           node = finalized_tasks_queue.get()
           topological_sorter.done(node)

   .. method:: add(node, *predecessors)

      Add a new node and its predecessors to the graph. Both the *node* and
      all elements in *predecessors* must be hashable.

      If called multiple times with the same node argument, the set of dependencies
      will be the union of all dependencies passed in.

      It is possible to add a node with no dependencies (*predecessors* is not
      provided) or to provide a dependency twice. If a node that has not been
      provided before is included among *predecessors* it will be automatically added
      to the graph with no predecessors of its own.

      Raises :exc:`ValueError` if called after :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.prepare`.

   .. method:: prepare()

      Mark the graph as finished and check for cycles in the graph. If any cycle is

>       detected, :exc:`CycleError` will be raised, but

Reviewer 7: Unless I'm missing it, we never documented `CycleError`.  If so, salient points:

* It's a subclass of `ValueError`.
* If multiple cycles exist, it will only return one of them, and _which_ one is not defined.
* The cycle it detected can be accessed via `.args[1]` of the exception instance.
   * And is a list of nodes, such that each node is, in the graph, an immediate predecessor of the next node in the list.
   * The first and last nodes of the list are the same, to make it clear that it's cyclic.

          if ts:
              ...

      Raises :exc:`ValueError` if called without calling :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.prepare`
      previously.

   .. method:: done(*nodes)

      Marks a set of nodes returned by :meth:`TopologicalSorter.get_ready` as
      processed, unblocking any successor of each node in *nodes* for being returned
      in the future by a call to :meth:`TopologicalSorter.get_ready`.

      Raises :exc:`ValueError` if any node in *nodes* has already been marked as
      processed by a previous call to this method or if a node was not added to the
      graph by using :meth:`TopologicalSorter.add`, if called without calling
      :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.prepare` or if node has not yet been returned by
      :meth:`~TopologicalSorter.get_ready`.

   .. method:: get_ready()

      Returns a ``tuple`` with all the nodes that are ready. Initially it returns all
      nodes with no predecessors, and once those are marked as processed by calling
      :meth:`TopologicalSorter.done`, further calls will return all new nodes that
      have all their predecessors already processed. Once no more progress can be
      made, empty tuples are returned.

>       made.

Reviewer 8: Oops--I think this word is extra.
